Welcome back to the Data Science Hangout.
I was going to play around with a lesson I learned from Matt Dancho last week.
If you've been here before, do you want to try putting a one in the chat?
If it's your first time joining today, maybe put a two in the chat.
It was fun seeing all the people commenting last week with Matt.
But if it is your first time, it's so nice to meet you.
I'm Rachel.
This is an open space for the whole data science community to connect and chat about data science
leadership, questions you're facing, and getting to learn about what's going on in the world of
data science across different industries and companies.
We share the recordings each week to our Posit YouTube, so you can always go back and rewatch
or find helpful resources.
These go up to the new Data Science Hangout site at Posit.co as well.
I was a bit slow on this, but I just put up Jesse's and Marco's sessions as well this week.
Together, we're all dedicated to creating a welcoming environment for everybody here,
so we love when everyone can participate and we can hear from you all,
no matter your level of experience or area of work.
There's always three ways that you can jump in and ask questions or
also provide your perspective on a point.
It doesn't just have to be a question.
You can jump in by raising your hand on Zoom here.
You can put questions in the Zoom chat, and feel free to just put a little star next to it
if it's something you want me to read out loud, if you're in a coffee shop or something like that.
Then we also have a Slido link, which I forgot to share with Hannah ahead of time,
so I'll copy that over in a second here and put that into the chat.
There you go.
With the Slido link, you can ask questions anonymously too.
I am so excited to be joined by my co-host for today, Eric Nance.
Eric is a director at Eli Lilly and Company, podcaster, and community builder
that you may have seen around the open-source community a few times.
He just celebrated his 100th podcast as well, so congrats, Eric.
I would love to have you just jump in and introduce yourself
and share a little bit about your role as well.
Well, thank you so much, Rachel, and I'm really thrilled to be here.
I've been watching the Hangout since the very beginning.
It's really an exciting space to be a part of and to be a co-host with you.
It's tremendously exciting.
My name is Eric, and I've been in my current role now as a director
in the statistical innovation group at Lilly for over 12 years,
which does not seem like a time that certainly flies,
but my day-to-day is a mix of a few things.
I'm sure this will probably come up in the conversation,
but I kind of wear a few hats.
I'm a mini-manager, as they say.
I got a couple of direct reports in our group,
and so I'm trying to help enable them to succeed.
And where I put a lot of my focus time these days
is bringing innovative algorithms and designs
for the new clinical studies that we're trying to launch.
And throughout all that process, the one tool that unifies everything is R.
So literally, it is at the forefront of what I do,
whether it's building Shiny apps, internal packages,
consulting, and even with the community building
that I'm sure we'll touch on as well.
So I've been in a mix of a lot of different things at Lilly,
but learned a lot along the way,
and certainly happy to share my insights of that.
And yeah, it's always never a dull moment, as they say.
That's awesome.
And I forgot to ask you, Eric,
what's something fun that you like to do in your free time as well,
so we can get to know that side too?
Well, one of them we probably already know.
I'm a bit of a hobbyist with podcasting and general tech.
But other than that, one that maybe people don't really know about
is I grew up in Michigan.
So I always grew up a sports fan, in particular, hockey.
So I'm a big Detroit Red Wings fan,
and they've had a little bit of a hard time the past few years.
But in the 1990s, they were Stanley Cup champions,
and those are some of the best years I've ever watched in sports.
Certainly, I'm a big hockey fan, for sure.
Nice.
Well, I would love to get the conversation going around
some of the community work that you do,
because I'm always so impressed with all that you do.
And I was just curious, how did you first get started in all this,
and like podcasting and just getting involved with so many community events?
Yeah, now it's going way back a ways,
but the roots of this actually started in my dissertation back in grad school,
where I would not have been able to complete it without R,
because R had the package from one of the leading authors
of a manuscript for the method I was using called competing risk.
And ever since that point,
I not only used that package to crunch through the numbers,
but then I was able to produce a dissertation with S-Weave,
which was a precursor to Knitter, and now what we know of R Markdown and Quarto.
So I was hooked, like I thought R was amazing.
I never really had training in it until then,
so I was just enamored with the world of open source.
And around this time, I was also getting into open source
with respect to like the Linux operating system and things like that.
And as I was learning things about Linux to help with my grad school duties,
I found podcasts.
There were some podcasters teaching me some great skills around Linux and open source,
and really helped me in quite a few situations with some education there.
And I thought, well, I like R so much, and I certainly don't know everything about it,
but maybe if I just start to put myself out there a little bit
and maybe see what might be receptive to people,
and kind of like a little nudge to learn out loud
before that became a catchphrase from Mara.
So I started the R podcast back in 2012, 2011.
I forgot the year, but it really just started me just kind of learning about R
and a lot of the things that I hadn't had a chance to pursue yet.
And lo and behold, I started to get some feedback that people were liking it,
and I decided to keep going.
And I think what really turned the corner on that
was not just me doing my own learning,
but to showcase the brilliant developers, package authors, practitioners
that were doing amazing work.
And I wanted to give them a platform to share their backstory,
you know, how they got to where they were.
And that started kind of my interview, you might say, sequence.
And through those connections, just things happened organically after that.
Started collaborating with NowPosit, formerly RStudio, quite a bit.
Started to go to the various conferences and meetups.
And lo and behold, I was learning so much from the community
that it became a passion to keep that going.
And then more recently, I decided to augment that into like Shiny
because I'm so passionate about Shiny as well.
Starting the Shiny Developer Series a couple of years ago.
And now more recently, the R Weekly Project
to help curate what is available in the community.
So all these things just kind of happened organically.
But I thought not many others are trying this route back in 2012
to put themselves out there via voice.
There are only a few blogs out there.
But I thought if the Linux podcasters helped me so much,
maybe I can help others in the R community too along the way.
And like I said, learn for myself as well, but just share it with the world.
So it all just kind of happened organically.
And I'm glad I stuck with it.
Certainly been off and on, as they say,
but it's been a real, real passion of mine to share that knowledge.
And like I said, to showcase who else is doing brilliant work in the community.
That's great.
And thank you so much for all that you do.
I love that phrase, learning out loud
and getting to see all the different examples through R Weekly too.
Can I ask you, like thinking back to those early stages,
what made you so enamored with open source?
It was just the brilliant technology behind it.
And the fact that we could get involved
without having to jump through maybe a proprietary company to get there.
That we could look at the source
if we had questions about how to function worked.
And for my dissertation, I had to look critically
at some of the methods I was using.
So the fact that the package code was right there on CRAN at the time,
I was able to look at the source,
verify that this method was doing what I expected.
But the fact that I could do that,
albeit it wasn't as easy as it is now with things like GitHub,
but still I could get in there.
I could read behind the lines, so to speak,
try things out and experiment.
And the fact that just so many innovations were happening
in the general open source community
that might take a big company years to get to.
And at that point, I was just hooked.
The fact that I could do this in statistical computing with R
and then in my general grad school duties,
be able to help others with pretty complicated projects,
hooking R with different technology.
It just was addicting to me that I could blend all this together
without having to be a part of like a huge organization
or sign a bunch of agreements to get access to things.
It was just really a mind-blowing experience
that I never really got wind of until I discovered R.
That's great. Thank you.
And I just wanted to remind everybody,
I see a few questions coming in on Slido,
but if you just joined a little bit into the session,
you can ask questions through Slido anonymously
and we'll share the link in the chat again here in a second.
But you can also just jump in and raise your hand here on Zoom
or put questions into the Zoom chat.
But I see one of the anonymous question was,
how have you married your love for R personally
with your professional work?
Great question.
So this is another mini story time, as they say,
but it was about a few years into my job
where in the very beginning,
I wasn't using R to do very much
because I was assigned to do a more,
you might say, traditional study project statistician role
where I was helping oversee the analysis strategy
of a particular study.
And as many might know in life sciences,
SAS has been the predominant player in computation there,
but that's slowly changing, which we may get to later.
But over time, they hooked me into an assignment,
pretty open-ended assignment,
where you're getting a lot of complicated biomarker data.
And this data was huge.
And we were trying to use
some pretty novel algorithms with it.
And that's where R came into play.
I was finally able to take what I learned in my dissertation
and start applying to actual work at the day job.
And then along the way,
we had another talented colleague
that was running at that time
called the SNR user group at Lilly.
And I started calling into it much like a hangout here,
but it was just people sharing what they were doing,
small but enthusiastic group.
And then within maybe a year or so of me attending that,
the leader of this group said,
hey, Eric, you know what?
I think you should take the reins on this.
And at first I'm kind of shocked
because I've only been with the company for a couple of years.
And this great colleague was very well respected
for asking me to do this.
But ever since then, that's when I thought,
okay, now it's time to take this to another level.
And lo and behold, I've been leading the internal R group
for about, yeah, eight, nine years.
And that's been another tremendous asset to my learning
and also getting insights
to what others in the organization are doing with R.
Because sometimes people might think,
oh, this contribution,
yeah, I just did a little bit here and there,
but I'm like, no, you should highlight that.
Let me give you a platform to share that
because we can all learn from your experience.
And then we'll all be sharing that knowledge together.
So definitely helping with that user group
has been a big help.
And just that little nudge to do something
a little outside the box early in my career
gave me that little, I'd say, nudge to take this further.
So again, kind of an organic thing,
but I'm very happy it happened that way
because it definitely changed a lot of things
for the better for me.
Awesome.
I'm starting to see a lot of questions
coming in here in the chat too.
I see Libby just asked one.
Do you want to jump in?
Sure.
I was wondering if you always knew
that you would go to industry after your PhD
or if you contemplated staying in academia?
Yeah, excellent question.
And first, Libby, congratulations
from one podcaster to another.
So I had to shout that out.
I did have a pretty inkling early on
that if I was going to, after I started to decide
to do the PhD, which actually was not instantaneous,
I thought I was just going to get a master's degree
and be done with it.
But I had a few people that were very close to me say,
if you're going to get the PhD,
you might want to do it now
before things get kind of crazy later in life.
But then as I'm going through that,
I do admit what I heard from other colleagues,
those that graduated in the same program years prior
were really enjoying the experience being in industry,
whether it was life sciences or other sectors in the world.
And I thought, you know what?
Yeah, I want to make a difference.
And I felt like at that time,
that would be the easiest way to do it.
But again, I have other great colleagues in academia.
So everybody's got their own preferences.
But I kind of knew pretty early on
that it was going to be an industry-type role for me.
And I've been happy with it ever since.
Awesome, thank you.
You bet.
Eric, you just said,
we're probably going to get a few SAS questions coming in.
And we have a few on Slido for you.
One was, how have you convinced leadership in pharma
to move away from proprietary programming languages
like SAS over to open source languages like R or Python?
Yeah, well, that's a good thing.
We got some time for this,
but I can keep this kind of brief to start.
But it was kind of leading by example a little bit.
I think that to solve complicated issues,
especially what I was doing
in that early assignment with biomarker analysis,
I wanted to demonstrate
that the outputs I can get from this,
the analytics I can run from this,
and do it efficiently to tie in
to some really important HPC,
high-performance computing infrastructure,
which at that time was not very easy to do in the SAS world.
I was able to turn around answers pretty quickly
and be able to share insights with the leadership,
the clinical team.
And they were saying,
hey, this is great.
Keep going, keep going with it.
So leading by example.
And then honestly, the other key event
that's happening across our industry
is the invent of the now the fourth
or fifth year running our pharma conference,
where now many of us that are passionate
about using R in the clinical realm
got together, organized this event from the ground up.
Maybe we have some of them listening here on the chat here.
But that really started to open eyes
of many of the industry leaders and life sciences to say,
hey, look what these people are doing with open source.
Look how they're bringing automation
in a seamless way with integrating R
with other pipelines
and generating interactive insights.
And it's just really grown exponentially since then.
And a lot of this is not possible
without the open source nature of R,
what we can grab from the community,
but also integrate it with other systems really easily.
Whether it's databases, high performance computing,
obviously shiny for web applications.
There's so many integrations that are possible
that other proprietary packages may have some solutions for.
But A, they cost money.
B, they can cost a lot of time.
But if you build up the talent,
you can do amazing things with R and the other integrations.
And I'm not going to sugarcoat it.
We're still not quite where I want to get to yet,
but we're definitely a lot farther in the last few years
than we ever were when I started working in life sciences.
Thank you.
Kind of along those lines, another question was,
do you have any suggestions for beginners
who had experience in SAS but are new to R?
Are there any specific approaches for better results?
OK, well, time for some hot takes perhaps.
So like that question probably insinuates,
I also started with SAS.
I did not know R before SAS.
They are fundamentally different.
So honestly, the first thing to keep in mind
is that many of the practices or maybe tricks
you've learned about how to do things in SAS,
probably not going to work with R.
They are fundamentally different from a language perspective.
So you've got to check that to the side a little bit
and go in with an open mind.
It will be challenging at first, but I'm
going to echo what others in the community have said,
is that I would say getting started with the tidyverse,
that's going to be pretty familiar in the way
the pipe works and other things like that with dplyr
and the like to what you might do in the SAS data
step historically.
So I think the tidyverse eases that transition a little bit,
but there are going to be some habits that you'll
have to grow into.
But I think that the materials online are really
great to get started with this.
In fact, Minae's Data Science in a Box
is another excellent resource, I think,
to get started with that we can probably link to.
There's lots of educational materials out there,
but unlearn the old habits first before you dive into it.
That would be my biggest advice.
Thank you.
I just copied over the Data Science in a Box
over to the chat, too.
I see, Javier, you had asked a question in the Zoom chat.
Do you want to jump in next?
Thanks, Rachel.
And Eric, huge fan of yours.
I feel a little starstruck here.
Like I've been following your podcast for years,
and I can't believe I just recently discovered
the Shiny Developer Series.
So seriously, thank you for everything
you're throwing back into the ether here.
Yeah, I have always worked for mostly large companies.
And when I got into my first real data science role,
I noticed that a lot of the Excel cleanup tasks
or just a lot of the mundane repetitive tasks
that so many people are doing on a weekly or monthly
or quarterly basis, it should be automated.
Sometimes they are just so disconnected from data science,
they have no advocate or no teacher,
no friend to be like, there are better ways
of doing what you are doing.
I also come from a finance background,
so I'm sort of nuanced.
My experiences are nuanced in that way.
But have you had any experience trying to advocate
for R or Closet Connect or Shiny and trying
to educate these different teams in corporate finance,
accounting, tax, or different reporting teams
and try to get them to use some of the R tool stack?
Is that Eli Lilly?
Yeah, excellent question.
And first of all, thank you for your very kind words.
It's great to see that some of these little endeavors
have a positive impact.
That's always gratifying.
I would say that in my early part of the career,
I've been pretty fortunate that a lot of the leadership
that's kind of been more close to me have seen the value
of what I was bringing and be able to let me take
what I'll call calculated risk to make that happen.
And in fact, one of those was way back in probably 2011 or so
when RStudio first, not closet, first released
the RStudio server.
I worked with our research IT group to get me
a virtual machine that I had root access to,
and they let me throw RStudio server on there
because I thought at the time,
after playing with that at home on my Linux systems,
because I have a bit of a Linux geek here,
that, hey, this could change the way we develop this at Lilly.
And I'm very fortunate that the IT group didn't say like,
oh, this new young statistician wants to do what?
We don't let them do that.
No, no, no.
They were complete opposite.
They said, hey, we're going to give you a little training
on this, but we're going to leave it to you.
And lo and behold, I got people hooked on developing
R code efficiently on that server.
Then Shiny server came along and I did basically
the same thing then.
And that's when people started to put little Shiny apps
that were doing maybe very little in the beginning,
but it opened the eyes of leadership
when they could quickly do an interactive visualization
of a trial result or maybe a custom data set.
And so that leading by example,
started to get the attention of leadership.
And then over time, my role kind of morphed
into being this hybrid of a statistician
and you might say an engineer kind of combining
the best of both so that I could execute on these ideas.
And again, be given the freedom
to try some of these things out.
Has everything I've done worked?
Not everything.
There've been a couple of dead ends here and there,
but I've been fortunate that the leadership
are ready to embrace an idea of saving time,
saving money, and the fact that I could automate
the creation of maybe a hundred biomarkers
being summarized in one Shiny app
versus an RTF output printing a hundred pages per marker.
That got attention, just that little win right there.
So it started small.
I didn't start big, so to speak,
but it started with incremental things.
And then it got to the point where people
were seeking me out to help with advice
on how they can automate something with R
or maybe in combo with Shiny or other utilities
instead of them settling for a default manual process.
But it didn't, it wasn't overnight.
It was incremental kind of wins along the way.
Thank you.
So I see a question over on Slido.
And Andy, I see your name there.
So feel free to jump in
if you want to add any other context too.
They can ask it.
It's what can you share regarding building
a community of practice in a larger org
in terms of finding other R users
and growing and sustaining interest?
Yeah, this is certainly another,
you know, I say passion area of mine
because I've, as I said, kind of in the outset,
the idea of bringing people together
and sharing knowledge has been something
I've been excited about for a long time.
It's not always easy because again,
we have to sometimes fight a little stigma
amongst ourselves that we feel like
the things we're doing with either R
or just in general what we're doing with analytics
isn't really that innovative.
It's just like part of the job, so to speak.
But I'm trying to get people to come
out of their shell a little bit
and celebrate it and not feel like everything
has to be super polished before they show it to us.
I really made a concerted effort
in the last few years to say,
hey, we are a welcoming group.
We would love to share our ideas.
If you want advice, we're happy to give it.
If you have any stumbling blocks,
we're happy to help solve it.
But even if you just found a great package
that simplified your workflow,
we just want to know about it.
It doesn't have to be anything fancy.
So making sure people felt comfortable
that sharing any contribution,
no matter quote, big or small,
has been one of the things we've really tried to do.
And honestly, finding a diverse set of topics
that we can learn from,
because not everybody is going to be interested
in the things I'm interested in, right?
But finding others to kind of give a different voice,
a different perspective,
whether it's from, you know,
creating that great table with GT
or automating a pipeline with,
you know, connecting R with AWS,
you know, lots of different things are out there
and making sure that there's a protected time
for people to showcase that.
Having a regular cadence has always been helpful too.
But I'll admit I'm not the best at it,
but I try to surround myself with others
that are enthusiastic about the same things,
the building this community.
So not doing it alone is definitely one piece of advice.
Find somebody else to tag along and help along the way.
I certainly appreciate that, Eric.
Thank you.
A couple of things I really got from what you just said,
the piece we're not doing alone,
I'm certainly on track for that.
I work in public health
at a large public state public health agency.
And there was an R user group a couple of years ago
before I came to the agency.
And that, I guess, sort of fizzled out.
And now there's more interest in it.
And so I've connected with the person
who had kind of started organizing the group previously.
And so we're going to work together
and try to reach a wider,
cast a wider net within the organization as well.
And then, and I love the piece
about really encouraging the small shares.
And even in the safe space,
we're certainly folding in that our agency
has both internally facing
and externally facing equity goals.
And so we're folding all that into our agreements
with how we meet and work with each other.
So I appreciate that as well
about the inclusiveness forefront of that.
So thank you.
Oh, my pleasure.
And those things, as long as you start with those,
everything else is going to fall in place.
Like it may not always be easy,
but if you set those expectations,
set that safe space,
and like I said, don't do it alone early on,
it's going to pay dividends.
And trust me, a lot of things I'm saying,
I have learned really the hard way,
but a lot of it has been organically improving quite a bit.
Thank you.
And I'm really interested in continuing
to have this conversation
with anyone else here in the group.
I'm going to drop my email in the chat here real quick.
And if you're interested
in having this conversation outside of this,
like please get in touch with me.
Thanks.
And I work in public health,
but if you're, thank you.
Yeah, take it to LinkedIn.
Will do.
I'm going to actually,
somebody suggested doing that for the organization
to like say, are there any users out there
and try to do something there too.
So yeah, thank you.
Andy, this discussion makes me so excited.
This is my favorite thing to talk about.
And I did just want to use one minute here to say,
I am starting a Slack group for community organizers
to be able to connect with each other
and share best practices, challenges, tips,
and all just kind of like get together
and figure out how we want to help each other too.
I was being careful about publicly
just sharing the link to the Slack.
So I just made a Google form
that I just put into the chat right now.
But we love to see people there too
and continue that discussion as well
or on LinkedIn,
wherever everybody ends up talking about it too.
But jumping over to a few other questions,
I see there was one on Slido, Eric,
that was, does the data science team
ever have trouble getting resources from the IT team?
If so, how do you navigate that?
Oh yeah.
Okay, another hot topic for me.
What there, it's been a mix of both, I'll say.
What helped me early in my career
as making great relationships
with that same research IT group
that gave me the keys, so to speak,
to that virtual server,
that has grown into probably
my most valuable collaboration in the entire company.
I'm probably sounding strong with that,
but it really is.
They have helped us out immensely
with infrastructure, with our HPC needs,
and really pushing the envelope
what we can do with R inside the enterprise.
And how I got there,
this is a fun little, you might say,
data mishaps story that I shared earlier this year
at a data mishaps conference.
But I just so happened in my eagerness
to turn loose on this really complicated analysis
to bring down the entire HPC cluster one day.
Like I brought it down.
It went crash into a halt.
And you can imagine the panic I felt
being a new statistician doing something like that.
But this IT group didn't say,
okay, we're not going to give him
any capabilities of doing this anymore.
They took me under their wing
and they really educated me
on what I could do better next time.
But they said, we want to partner with you.
We know you've got the ambition
to really utilize the tech in the best way.
And we want to bring you under our wing.
And that's been really fruitful.
So whenever I need anything from them
or they need anything from me,
we're there for each other.
It's not always that way in other parts of the IT world.
So it does pay to build those relationships
with those that maybe kind of get
where you're trying to get to
and they can help translate some of the processes
or some of the hoops you have to jump through.
So I've been trying to keep those going fruitfully.
And then it's really just being persistent
and showing why you need that certain access key
or why you need access to that API.
Really just showing them what you're trying to do here.
And I've been fortunate.
Once they see the value of it,
they're going to go to bat for me to get it.
It just sometimes can take a while
because there are many different IT groups
across security, DevOps, and all the other sectors
that you have to navigate through.
But with the strong relationships,
that can become easier.
I love to see all the chat
that's happening during the Hangout too.
Thank you, Eric.
Mink, I see you have a few great questions
in the chat coming up.
Do you want to jump in?
Thank you, Rachel.
So I'd like to thank Rachel on the onset
because I've been following the series
for I think more than a month.
I've been joining week on week
and joining in all the great conversations.
And I've been looking forward
to the conversation with Eric
because the domain I'm in, in pharma and insurance.
So I have had similar experiences
of incremental building out solutions
and then having them be adopted in the org.
So I have a lot of questions,
but I would just keep it short.
Maybe two questions for now.
One would be like,
how do you facilitate your SAS programmers
to learn R or get into the R ecosystem
and be open to it?
Because in my experience,
what I've understood is SAS programmers
try to be in that tech or domain
because of the stability and everything around it.
And plus, since RStudio rebranded to Post-it
and how they have launched Shiny for Python
and serverless Shiny applications,
you being a Shiny trainer yourself,
what are your thoughts around it?
And how do you see the adaptability
of Shiny for Python in pharma industry assets?
Yeah, great questions.
Thank you for those.
So with the first one,
what has helped us,
and I will admit, again,
we can go much farther than we're currently at,
but one of the wins that we've had
is trying to look at the big strengths of R
in certain situations
and just let things kind of grow from there.
So one example is that we've been embracing
quite a bit the idea of interactive R Markdown reports.
And now interactive portal is becoming a huge thing
that we got our attention on,
but showing our traditional,
you might say, SAS analyst group that,
hey, with a little investment
in learning how R Markdown works,
we can give you this interactive plot of efficacy results
using something like Plotly
and be able to quickly drill down
and zoom in on certain data insights
from that visualization
that you would have to produce like 10,
12 plots individually
to get to that same result in a static way.
And that's actually started to take up quite a bit
with some internal projects,
that idea of interactive exploration.
Now that's not the end goal, right?
I mean, me personally,
I have much bigger goals than that.
That's why I'm involved in this R Consortium work group
where we're trying to use R for clinical submissions
straight through and through,
where we got some great leads on that coming up soon.
So we started with capabilities
that are brought to the table
that are just really difficult to replicate easily
with other proprietary products.
So that helped us quite a bit so far.
And respect to Shiny for Python,
yes, like many in the,
who attended our studio conference,
Joe Chang announced that I was glued to my chair
trying to see where this trend would go.
I think it's still early days for us
in life sciences for embracing it.
But at the same time,
the idea of a serverless Shiny app
has raised a lot of eyebrows.
And certainly I'm keeping a close eye on it.
And over time,
I'm sure it's gonna bring some interesting insights
to what we can deploy.
Now, it just so happens that
in a lot of the workflows I'm doing at the moment,
they're based in R
simply because that's been a lot of what we've
historically built in my particular group.
But we definitely have some
that are very interested in Shiny for Python
and trying to see how far it takes.
I just would say in life sciences,
it's still pretty early days,
but again, we're keeping a close eye on it.
Yeah, that's what I understand.
Thank you for answering those.
That's super helpful.
That's what I understood too for pharma industry.
But I think in the long run,
that might be the future for newer apps
that would be probably built from scratch
and not the legacy apps probably.
But I just want to keep an eye out
on the good stuff that you and Eli Lilly is doing
and learn from that along the way.
So thank you.
Thank you, Eric.
Thank you, Rachel.
Yeah, thank you.
I see, Mike, you asked a question that says
on a recent LinkedIn post,
and I would love to hear
what this recent LinkedIn post was too.
So yeah, I had talked on LinkedIn
about being a square peg in a round hole,
being a statistician but not doing statistics,
being a data scientist
but not fitting machine learning or AI models,
being a pharmacogeneticist
but not fitting models or doing that kind of stuff.
And Eric nicely chimed in and said,
I know you feel your pain
or something worse to that effect.
So I guess being a square peg
in an organization is a tough thing, right?
Because you are not like the others.
So what advice would you give
other similar square pegs
who may be sitting in other organizations
and maybe on this call?
Well, I'm glad you chimed in on this.
And I remember when you put that post,
I was like, okay, yeah, I feel seen on this for sure.
And Mike's a good friend.
So I'm really glad you're here.
So I think one thing that's helped me
as I struggle with this,
sometimes to this day,
still struggle with parts of this,
is not being afraid of it,
but using the strengths
to help better the people around me immediately
and then letting that kind of spread out.
So I won't lie,
there's some pressure being known
as one of the R people at the org
that people go to for questions every week or whatnot.
But what I've been trying to do
is kind of what I said earlier,
bring up others around me
to help carry out certain messages
or certain steps in what makes me that square peg,
kind of showing where these skills are applied
in what situation
and getting some help along the way.
And one tangible example earlier this year
that I took on is,
I was really sick and tired
of putting the same email response
to questions I got every week
about getting access to the RStudio server,
getting access to the HPC cluster.
How do I launch a Shiny app?
Eric, help.
It was almost like the copy paste of the response
and I got tired of it.
And when I get tired of something,
that's when I'm like,
I'm gonna put this down for a bit.
I'm gonna focus on solving this right now.
So I took the first two months of this year
to produce an internal documentation portal
written in Hugo with a really cool theme
to document almost every type of info
I thought for enabling people
the ability to get started with R.
I called this,
and it was in collaboration with the HPC team.
So they helped me along the way.
But when I launched that,
it made me feel like this square peg thing,
now I brought value out of that to others
because I took this knowledge
that was in my head most of the time
and I put it out there,
gave links to people,
and now people are sending those documentation links
to others when they have questions.
It's not always coming on me.
So I feel fortunate that
spreading that knowledge has helped.
There are so many other aspects
where I don't think I've spread enough yet
that I'm looking at the best ways of doing it.
But it also helped that
I've had some leadership recently
that know when they can let me turn loose on something.
They're confident that I'm not going to
steer things in the wrong direction,
that I just need a little time to ruminate
and maybe try this idea out.
And the risk versus reward,
they tend to think,
okay, the reward is greater potential here than the risk.
But there are certain aspects of this
I still struggle with.
So really it's bringing others along
and making sure not all this stuff is trapped in my head
is the first thing I'm trying to address
in this ongoing quest, I might say.
Hope that helps.
Thanks, Eric.
I was waiting to see if anyone wanted to jump in there.
I see, Travis, you also put a great question into the chat.
Do you want to jump in next?
Sure.
I guess my joke question's about the Eli Lilly Twitter account.
Oh, yeah, it was the first one.
Oh, fine, fine.
Eric, I was hoping you'd get ahold of the parody account
and tweet that Eli is R only now, you know?
That'd be a winner.
I might even return to the bird side if that was possible.
But anyway, my real question,
are there key ways that you want to see Eli's data stack change
over the next five years, let's say?
I think a lot of us that champion R at an org
end up becoming R administrators
and kind of like have to learn things
that we didn't set out to learn.
You know, I know how to write R,
but I spend most of my time these days
thinking about infrastructural challenges,
like what's the right mix of cloud versus on-prem,
particularly when we're talking about life sciences data.
That gets to be a sticky question.
Modern database usage is not a common thing
in pharma and in CROs
because of kind of software monopolies
like metadata and others in that space.
Do you have strategy you can share
around those sorts of things?
Like, what are you all thinking?
Because a lot of our usage can be kind of handicapped
by not being able to actually hit a real database
in the way that we would like.
Are you all developing on that side?
Oh, I'm definitely thinking of it.
And in fact, one of the earliest internal R packages
I created at the company was, in essence,
a wrapper to Hadley Wickham's Haven package,
the imports assays that's into R.
I call it Coaster, very affectionate name
because it's just one of those things
you might take for granted,
but when you need it, you like it.
I felt like I should never have had to do that.
I feel like the data should not be trapped
in SAS proprietary formats.
This is where Eric's going to have another hot take here.
So hopefully I still have a job after this.
But I do think that the wave of the future,
and I'm seeing some work streams around this,
is looking at alternative data formats that are more open
that could then be transformed
into what we need for, say, a submission or other pipelines.
But we're not there yet.
We're definitely not there yet.
And that's why I wrote that internal package.
I wanted to lower the barrier of entry
for people around me in the statistics group
to use R for their innovative work,
but not feel handcuffed
because the data was in this proprietary format.
It's not perfect though.
We have some esoteric errors that I cannot debug
because who's good at reverse engineering
a proprietary format?
Not me.
I just try to leverage what the community has.
So I think until we as an industry
kind of really look ourselves in the mirror and say,
this way we're capturing data
is not going to cut it for the long term,
we're always going to have to jump through hoops.
And I'm not happy about that.
But I do think there's starting to get more attention
on what we're seeing the general tech sector do
for volumous data and easier access to data.
I think the seeds are being planted,
but this isn't where I want to be yet.
So admittedly at Lilly,
what we've been concentrating on
is kind of more on the downstream effects of an analysis,
making outputs interactive,
giving people shiny apps to quickly explore their results.
We're having more traction there immediately
because that's accessible.
Once you get the data into R,
then we're able to turn loose on this.
But this is an evolving story.
And I share the pains
that you've been mentioning there quite a bit.
Thanks, that's a good answer.
I know I've been keeping an eye
on that CDISC JSON hackathon.
You probably are aware of that as well.
That seems intriguing,
a way to get out of the SAS 7 BDAT
kind of web that we live in these days,
but we'll see.
We'll see, time will tell,
but it's worth watching.
Thank you very much.
Can you share that in the chat, Travis?
Yeah, sure. I'll dig it up somewhere.
Awesome.
Niamh, I see you just asked a question in the chat too.
Do you want to jump in?
Yeah.
Hi, I'm Niamh from Vietnam.
And I'm about to graduate from business analytics,
but not necessarily data science,
but I do have studied
quantitative psychology in undergrad.
And I can do statistics with R or Python or SAS,
but I don't know how to break in
to life sciences and get a job
as a junior entry-level data scientist.
And if there's any tips, that'd be helpful.
Thank you.
I'm living in Boston, by the way,
but I can move anywhere or remote.
Thanks for joining.
Yeah, yeah.
Thanks for the great question.
In the industry these days,
I think some of the best things to help,
you might say, break in
is maybe this will go to other industries as well.
And I'm curious what the people in the chat think of this.
But even just finding an example data set
or an example domain that you want to maybe practice
say analytical skills on and sharing that
as like a blog or another online resource,
start building up that portfolio a bit.
I can tell you that if I see
like a CV or resume come
and they asked me to do like an onsite interview
or a phone interview,
and I'm going to look at that CV
and they have a GitHub profile.
Oh yeah, I'm going to be looking at that
and I'm going to be very interested
because it means that they're trying to
build up their skillset in the open.
And I'm not going to require everybody to do that
because me of all people,
I know how precious time can be,
especially when you have other personal responsibilities,
but finding some avenue to put yourself out there
that will go a long way.
But I'm sure there are quite a few companies.
And in fact, my company just posted a couple of positions.
We're looking for some orange, shiny talent as well.
There's definitely opportunities out there.
I think the key is kind of showing that skillset
that you're building up
and then being able to really embrace the idea
of using R, using other languages
to really do an innovative analysis.
I agree, it's not easy in the beginning,
but building out that portfolio,
I think will be a big help.
Yes, thank you so much for sharing, Eric.
And thanks, Rachel, for organizing.
Yeah, I'll build my portfolio.
Thank you.
And I was just trying to go grab a few links.
I think Rami, Crispin talked a bit about this
in the data science hangout that he was on too.
And we talked about it for a bit.
And I see Libby, you mentioned, oh, thank you for sharing it.
Javier just posted a great shiny template and tutorial as well.
And Libby just put that in the chat.
Thanks, Javier.
Jumping through to see a few questions from Slido
that I think I missed a bit earlier.
And one was, sorry, scrolling up.
Oh, one was being at Eli Lilly so long, Eric.
What have been the biggest changes
you've seen over that time?
Well, there's been a lot.
A lot of the change that happened
that are most at forefront to me
was an initiative many years ago
where we tried to minimize the time
from say a treatments discovered
in say the discovery lab
to when we can actually get that treatment
out to patients to benefit from.
It's kind of called minimizing that white space to get there.
To do that, we had to do a lot of things differently.
There has been reorgs in terms of like
how trials are designed,
more emphasis into other functionalities.
But within statistics,
it actually empowered us quite a bit
to push new cutting edge algorithms
for designing and for simulation
and to not just do the traditional analysis
for like a clinical outcome.
So the fact that we got this mandate to be like,
okay, we got to shorten this time
that we're in this research phase or this study phase,
then we had to really put all hands on deck
to put out new solutions.
And so that just brought innovation out of necessity,
but it also opened the door for those in my group
at the time to really think differently
of how we're leveraging R in the design space
and become one of the industry leaders
in doing clinical simulation.
We've definitely have really much relied
on a lot of the functionalities that my colleagues have made.
And I'm not gonna come here and say,
I know all the ins and outs of every statistical method.
That's why we have a team, right?
Everybody can specialize in their key areas,
but we've all been able to pitch in
and be able to bring that innovation
to more novel designs that can shorten that time
that a patient has to be in a trial.
And the industry itself still has a ways to go,
but just that emphasis on let's get these treatments
out to patients sooner,
just organically then brought some new innovations
that we were doing in statistics.
And it really gave us a voice at the table
that we could bring some really innovative change
to how we were doing things in the past.
So certainly that's been one of the higher level
changes I've seen.
And like I said, embracing open source
in more than just a set of very simple ways,
especially with R has been a big change as well
because it's still not a hundred percent
and it'd probably never be a hundred percent,
but we've got the attention in the right places now
to really build some key innovations.
And I've been fortunate to be in the forefront
of some of that and bringing others along the way
is what I get excited about too.
Thank you so much, Eric.
And I know the time goes by very quickly here,
but I don't think we can let today
and without talking a bit about podcasting.
And I see there was some of the,
somebody had asked a question.
I think it's Mike.
I'm not sure if he's still on.
Let me just scroll up.
But Mike asked as a, can't find it right now,
but something along the lines of as an audio nerd,
what's your process for recording and editing?
Oh yes.
We get to go to the geek corner here of audio production.
Okay.
Lots of thoughts on this.
I've gone through many different phases of this.
What I've settled on now is that in particular
for the R Weekly show that I do with Mike Thomas,
who's been in this group a few times in the past
and shout out to Mike if he's listening.
We connect virtually using a platform called Zencaster,
but there's quite a few like this
where you can just have a recording
in the cloud of your voice
and then be able to download that
and do whatever you want afterwards.
So we use that every,
either Tuesday or Wednesday morning or afternoon,
depending on our schedules to record our voice.
But, and I bring it down locally
and I use a software, unfortunately not open source,
but it's also the state of the art
in this called Reaper to do the actual editing
where I can automate a lot of the voice processing
to get like the levels nice and avoid clipping
and make everything kind of sound pretty,
at least halfway decent.
And it's just super blazing fast,
you know, exit out or X out all my little ums
or like, oh, I botched that person's name wrong.
I do that over again.
So being able to smooth all that out
and do it pretty quickly,
that's been my tool of choice for audio editing.
It's been Reaper to bring the voice tracks in
and it's a cross-platform Mac, Windows and Linux.
So me being a Linux guy, I get to use that too.
So that's been helpful.
And then for the video side, for the Shiny Dev Series,
I know that's not part of the question,
but I can't not talk about the Shiny Dev Series.
I record everything,
whether it's a live stream or my video tutorials
with OBS, Open Broadcaster Studio.
It's a lot to get into at first,
but actually Jim Hester, a former Posit employee,
was doing a few tutorials
about some of the things he was working on.
And I asked him at RStudioConf a couple of years ago,
hey, those are great tutorials, what are you using?
He's matter of fact, oh, I'm using OBS.
I'm like, OBS, isn't that like super hard to learn?
He's like, oh, you'd get the hang of it.
And sure enough, I got addicted to it.
So now I use that for my video production
and that's been a huge win for me
because it's so flexible.
And members of the Linux community that I follow
have also supercharged OBS setups
and I follow their lead
and bring that into my work station over here.
So OBS for video and then Reaper for the audio.
Awesome, thank you so much.
Thanks Libby for writing them down into the chat too.
I just wanted to,
there were so many great questions today,
so I'm sure that I have missed a few.
So I just wanna say,
feel free to raise your hand on here
if I've missed a question that you asked as well.
I think there's one over on Slido
that Sam asked a bit earlier.
It was, what are your favorite
open source alternative apps
that you would recommend folks migrate over to?
Like Mastodon or Standard Notes, for example.
Well, those are, yeah,
definitely two of favorites currently.
So we all know the situation going on with Twitter.
We don't have to dive into it,
but Mastodon has been kind of
where a lot of the art community
is going for social messaging.
So I have an account on there.
I just formed our weeklies account on there.
So how we recommend Mastodon.
And for keeping notes, yeah.
Standard Notes is a Markdown based open source editor,
which I can sync very quickly across all of my apps.
Very quickly across all my devices.
So anytime I, maybe I'm out and about at a kid's practice
and I was on our studio community or another site,
I want to quickly jot down the name of a package
or a name of a website.
Then I can quickly write something in Markdown,
bring it into my computer
and I get back and research on it.
And I keep all my production notes on there.
I keep all my conference notes on there
of what I've learned that like our pharma
or our studio comps.
And then other apps that I use on a day-to-day
definitely are more on the Linux and media production side.
But like I said, OBS earlier,
I use Shotcut for video editing.
I use obviously Firefox and Brave for web browsing.
I am using VS Code quite a bit now
for my development needs alongside RStudio IDE.
So lots of things in my toolbox
and little utilities just can just add up
to really help out.
But those are the big ones for sure
that are in every computer I have here.
Thank you.
Eugene, I see you have your hand raised.
You want to jump in?
Yeah, just a quick question.
I've looked at really trying to do a lot more ML Ops
in my current sort of role in what I'm doing
and creating repeatable scalable flows.
And I noticed there's a package called the targets package,
which is Eli Lilly associated.
And a lot of the things that I hear about Airflow,
I am very curious to know if you're using targets,
if it has been a very robust sort of backend
for doing things,
how fast you've been able to create efficiencies with it
because it really looks at least from the outset,
like it's quite an endeavor.
And it looks like it could be used
for a lot of different use cases
that sort of are in my head and become fast
because it looks like it even has
a high performance computing backend
that can link with maybe some sort of Hadoop technologies
that are in the cloud.
So yeah, very curious.
So it very much helps that on our extended team,
Will Landau, the author of targets,
we're in the same group.
So we get to share knowledge
and I've learned from him way more than he learns from me.
But yes, targets has been a huge factor
in our clinical simulation pipelines
and other endeavors to simplify and automate
and make sure we don't have to repeat the same analysis
over and over again.
And it's been used very heavily in our group.
And yes, the learning curve might be a little bit,
you know, harsh to start with,
but Will has the most extensive documentation
for a package I have ever seen.
Yeah, you can book that, that's recorded.
Will does an amazing job with his documentation.
So you just go to targets home site,
you're gonna see manuals,
you're gonna see other tutorials.
And he's beefing that up even more
with things like the bugging pipelines and such.
So certainly an MLOps domain for targets.
He's definitely done examples of that in the past.
And we're definitely using targets quite heavily
and future you will thank you for investing in targets.
Awesome, awesome, thank you.
Thank you.
And thank you, Jordan, for sharing the link in the chat too.
I'm starting to hear a lot more about targets.
Sounds like we should have a presentation on targets
at some point.
I think Isabella and our team mentioned that as well.
I know we have a few minutes left here,
but somebody had asked on Slido, Eric,
we'd love to see all the links to your podcast.
I shared our weekly and shiny developer series.
Anything else that you wanna share with us
about how to like keep in touch
with all the amazing work you're doing?
Yeah, that's a great point.
I'll swipe this in the chat right now.
I did a little pre-work ahead of that,
but yeah, you can get in touch with me on LinkedIn
or on Twitter,
even though I probably won't post as much on Twitter.
I'm still checking it occasionally.
And my Mastodon account,
which I established earlier this year.
Those are definitely the three biggest ways
to get in touch.
But yeah, Rachel, you basically said
the shiny dev series.
We have a nice home site for that.
You can say subscribe to the YouTube channel
for new videos.
And then our weekly, just ourweekly.org,
you'll see the podcast link right at the top.
Yeah, we're always looking for people
to get involved with that project.
So please get in touch with us if you're interested.
But yeah, those are the major places,
if I can say that.
And maybe I'll have time to resurrect
the old R podcast that I started way back when.
So that's on my list to do next year.
Amazing, thank you.
Thank you, Ming, for summarizing those
and putting those into the chat too.
That's really, really helpful.
Happy to.
Let me just double check.
Any questions that I missed?
Anything on top of someone's mind
that you want to make sure you ask today?
Feel free to just jump in, raise your hand.
I think we got to everything.
Awesome.
Well, thank you so much, Eric, for joining us.
And seriously, thank you so much
for all that you do for the community.
It's really impressive.
And I know so many people have benefited
from all the work that you do.
Thank you for all the questions
and everything today too.
Oh, this has, like I said, been a real thrill for me.
And I can talk about this stuff all day, literally.
So it was good to be on here.
But the Data Science Hangout is a wonderful place.
So if this is your first time attending,
definitely come back.
It's a great place to be.
Thank you so much.
And I just remembered, I almost forgot to say,
next week is Thanksgiving on Thursday.
So we won't have a Hangout next week,
but we'll be there the week after.
So see you in two weeks, everybody.